Get started tutorial for experiments (with readable diff) (#2195)
iterative/dvc.org: content/docs/start/experiments.md

# Get Started: Experiments

⚠️ This feature is only available in DVC 2.0 ⚠️

Experiments proliferate quickly in ML projects where there are many parameters
to tune or other permutations of the code or data. We can organize such projects
and only keep what we ultimately need with
[experiments](/doc/command-reference/exp).

> 📖 See [Experiment Management](/doc/user-guide/experiment-management) for more
> information on DVC's approach.

## Using experiments

In the previous section, we learned how to tune
[ML pipelines](/doc/tutorials/get-started/ml-pipeline) and compare the changes.

> Let's further increase the number of features in the `featurize` stage to see

Author: Added some explanation to the very first paragraph:

> DVC can track your experiments without you needing to commit each one in Git, so
that your repo doesn't become polluted with all of your experiments. You can get
rid of experiments once you no longer need them.

LMK what you think.

> Let's further increase the number of features in the `featurize` stage to see

Reviewer: Great! Suggested 💅 edit:

> DVC can track experiments for you so there's no need to commit each one to Git.
This way your repo doesn't become polluted with all of them. You can discard
experiments once they're no longer needed.

how it compares.

`dvc exp run` makes it even easier to try a new experiment:

```dvc
$ dvc exp run --set-param featurize.max_features=3000
```

<details>

### 💡 Expand to see what this command does.

`dvc exp run` is similar to `dvc repro` but with some added conveniences for
running experiments. The `--set-param` (or `-S`) flag sets the values for
[parameters](/doc/command-reference/params) as a shortcut to editing
`params.yaml`.

Check that the `featurize.max_features` value has been updated in `params.yaml`:

> ```diff

Author: Hmm, this was copied from all the other experiments pages, although I think you are right that `git` might look slightly better (it colors the entire line instead of coloring only the plus/minus signs). Let me know if you have a preference here:
1. Leave as is
2. Change this one instance
3. Change all instances (here or in a separate PR)

> ```diff

Reviewer: > this was copied from all the other experiments pages

Shoot, I see it's in 3 other misc. docs indeed. I'll update those separately 🙂 so my vote goes to # 2 here.

> ```diff

Reviewer: I see you already went for `git`. Resolving

 featurize:
-  max_features: 1500
+  max_features: 3000
```

Any edits to dependencies (parameters, source code, data) will be reflected in
the experiment run.

</details>

`dvc exp diff` compares experiments:

```dvc
$ dvc exp diff
Path         Metric    Value    Change
scores.json  avg_prec  0.56191  0.009322
scores.json  roc_auc   0.93345  0.018087

Path         Param                   Value    Change
params.yaml  featurize.max_features  3000     1500
```

## Iterating over experiments

> The real magic of `dvc exp run` happens when running multiple experiments. So

Author: I changed this section to "Simultaneously running multiple experiments." Thoughts?

> The real magic of `dvc exp run` happens when running multiple experiments. So

Reviewer: > I changed this to "Simultaneously running multiple experiments."

It's more precise for sure. But it's not _really_ simultaneous unless you use `--jobs > 2` (and I'd go for "parallel" in that case).

How about something explicit like "Experiment queues"? Or if you prefer an action like in your other titles, maybe "Queueing experiment runs"? I guess most people should know what queueing is and be able to infer why it could be useful here.

> The real magic of `dvc exp run` happens when running multiple experiments. So

Author: Yeah, "queueing" is a bit of an odd word, but this is an example where it fits well, and it's the term used in the command, so I'll go with that.

far, we have been tuning the `featurize` stage, but there are also parameters
for the `train` stage, which trains a
[random forest classifier](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier.html).

These are the `train` parameters in `params.yaml`:

```yaml
train:

>   seed: 20170428

Author: We are trying to keep the names short for `dvc exp show`, and it impacts other pages, so I would rather leave as is unless you feel strongly about it.

>   seed: 20170428

Reviewer: Sounds good 👍

Queued experiment 'd3f6d1e' for future execution.
$ dvc exp run --queue --set-param train.min_split=64
Queued experiment 'f1810e0' for future execution.
$ dvc exp run --queue --set-param train.min_split=2 --set-param train.n_est=100
Queued experiment '7323ea2' for future execution.
$ dvc exp run --queue --set-param train.min_split=8 --set-param train.n_est=100
Queued experiment 'c605382' for future execution.
$ dvc exp run --queue --set-param train.min_split=64 --set-param train.n_est=100
Queued experiment '0cdee86' for future execution.
```

Next, run all queued experiments simultaneously using `--run-all` (and in
parallel with `-j`):

```dvc
$ dvc exp run --run-all -j 2
```

## Comparing many experiments

To compare all of these experiments, we need more than `diff`.

`dvc exp show` compares any number of experiments in one table:

```dvc
$ dvc exp show --no-timestamp --include-params train.n_est,train.min_split
┏━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┓
┃ Experiment    ┃ avg_prec ┃ roc_auc ┃ train.n_est┃ train.min_split ┃
┡━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┩
│ workspace     │  0.56191 │ 0.93345 │ 50         │ 2

> │ master        │  0.55259 │ 0.91536 │ 50         │ 2

Reviewer: Same in other tables further down.

│ ├── exp-bfe64 │  0.57833 │ 0.95555 │ 50         │ 8
│ ├── exp-b8082 │  0.59806 │ 0.95287 │ 50         │ 64
│ ├── exp-c7250 │  0.58876 │ 0.94524 │ 100        │ 2
│ ├── exp-b9cd4 │  0.57953 │ 0.95732 │ 100        │ 8
│ ├── exp-98a96 │  0.60405 │  0.9608 │ 100        │ 64
│ └── exp-ad5b1 │  0.56191 │ 0.93345 │ 50         │ 2
└───────────────┴──────────┴─────────┴────────────┴─────────────────┘
```

Each experiment is given an arbitrary name by default (although we can specify
one with `dvc exp run -n`.) We can see that `exp-98a96` performed best among
both of our metrics, with 100 estimators and a minimum of 64 samples required to

> split a node.

Author: We have already shortened this param name and taken out any descriptions of the specific parameters, so I'm not sure it's going to make sense to anyone familiar with random forest models without the full description. Users may not really care what these hyperparameters mean, but if anyone does, they might be confused since there are multiple hyperparameters in a random forest model that take some minimum number of samples. See https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier.html.

> split a node.

Reviewer: > Users may not really care what these hyperparameters mean, but if anyone does, they might be confused

K. Yeah this was 💅 but if you prefer to have it there let's keep it.

> See `dvc exp show --help` for more info on its options.

> ## Promoting experiments

Reviewer: And if we use "persist" instead of "promote" there's another 2 phrases further down that could change:
- "Let's promote it to our regular pipeline" -> "Let's finish making the experiment persistent"
- "dvc push will push ... once it has been promoted" - > "`dvc push` only uploads persistent experiment data..."

> ## Promoting experiments

Author: Let me know what you think of the updates.

> ## Promoting experiments

Reviewer: LGTM!

Now that we know the best parameters, let's keep that experiment and ignore the
rest.

`dvc exp apply` checks out the specified experiment to our workspace:

```dvc
$ dvc exp apply exp-98a96

> Changes for experiment 'exp-98a96' have been applied to your current workspace.

Author: Hm, it does for me 🤷

> Changes for experiment 'exp-98a96' have been applied to your current workspace.

Reviewer: Depends on the screen width of course. I check at the minimal width where there's still a right-hand side bar:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1477535/109352927-3c037900-7841-11eb-9f3e-f01c85809ad4.png)

```

<details>

### 💡 Expand to see what this command does.

`dvc exp apply` is similar to `dvc checkout` but it works with experiments that

> have not been manually committed to the Git repo. DVC tracks everything in the

Author: I'm not sure what you mean, so maybe I made a great point by accident? Could you explain more? The typical workflow would likely be to use `exp run` a bunch of times followed by `exp apply` and `git commit`.

> have not been manually committed to the Git repo. DVC tracks everything in the

Reviewer: > > great point. I never thought that you could exp run a few times and git add/commit it yourself
>
> The typical workflow would likely be to use exp run a bunch of times followed by exp apply and git commit.

Exactly. I was assuming that's the only workflow but "have not been manually committed" made me realize users could just use `exp run` (even repeating a past exp instead of `exp apply`) and check the results with `metrics/exp diff/show` (or manually), then commit when they're satisfied (which resets `exp show`).

Anyway. I'm just wondering if we should consider that workflow seriously. And if now, why mention "have not been manually committed"? Minor

> have not been manually committed to the Git repo. DVC tracks everything in the

Author: I think this is poorly worded rather than making a great point. The intention was to convey that `dvc checkout` is to persistent (Git-committed) pipeline iterations what `dvc exp apply` is to ephemeral experiments. 

Maybe I should just drop `that have not been manually committed to the Git repo`?

> have not been manually committed to the Git repo. DVC tracks everything in the

Author: Dropping for now.

> have not been manually committed to the Git repo. DVC tracks everything in the

Reviewer: Sounds good 👍

pipeline by committing it in our Git branch:

```dvc
$ git add dvc.lock params.yaml prc.json roc.json scores.json
$ git commit -a -m "Preserve best random forest experiment"
```

> `dvc push` will push the above experiment to a remote once it has been
> promoted and committed to our Git branch. The other experiments will not be
> pushed to the remote. See `dvc exp push` and `dvc exp pull` for how to share
> other experiments.

## Cleaning up

After committing the best experiment to Git, let's take another look at the
experiments table:

```dvc
$ dvc exp show --no-timestamp --include-params train.n_est,train.min_split
┏━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┓
┃ Experiment ┃ avg_prec ┃ roc_auc ┃ train.n_est┃ train.min_split
┡━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┩
│ workspace  │  0.60405 │  0.9608 │ 100        │ 64
│ master     │  0.60405 │  0.9608 │ 100        │ 64
└────────────┴──────────┴─────────┴────────────┴─────────────────┘
```

Where did all the experiments go? By default, `dvc exp show` only shows
experiments since the last commit, but don't worry. The experiments remain

> cached and can be shown or applied. For example, use `-n` to show experiments
> from the previous n commits:

Reviewer: 💅 
```suggestion
<abbr>cached</abbr> and can be shown or applied. For example, use `-n` to show
experiments from the previous _n_ commits:
```

```dvc

> $ dvc exp show -n 2 --no-timestamp --include-params train.n_est,train.min_split

Reviewer: To avoid horizontal scroll:
```suggestion
$ dvc exp show -n 2 --no-timestamp
                    --include-params train.n_est,train.min_split
```

┏━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┓
┃ Experiment    ┃ avg_prec ┃ roc_auc ┃ train.n_est┃ train.min_split ┃
┡━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┩
│ workspace     │  0.60405 │  0.9608 │ 100        │ 64
│ master        │  0.60405 │  0.9608 │ 100        │ 64
│ 64d74b2       │  0.55259 │ 0.91536 │ 50         │ 2
│ ├── exp-bfe64 │  0.57833 │ 0.95555 │ 50         │ 8
│ ├── exp-b8082 │  0.59806 │ 0.95287 │ 50         │ 64
│ ├── exp-c7250 │  0.58876 │ 0.94524 │ 100        │ 2
│ ├── exp-98a96 │  0.60405 │  0.9608 │ 100        │ 64
│ ├── exp-b9cd4 │  0.57953 │ 0.95732 │ 100        │ 8
│ └── exp-ad5b1 │  0.56191 │ 0.93345 │ 50         │ 2
└───────────────┴──────────┴─────────┴────────────┴─────────────────┘
```

Eventually, old experiments may clutter the experiments table.

`dvc exp gc` removes all references to old experiments:

```dvc
$ dvc exp gc --workspace

> $ dvc exp show -n 2 --no-timestamp --include-params train.n_est,train.min_split

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ dvc exp show -n 2 --no-timestamp
                    --include-params train.n_est,train.min_split
```

┏━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┓
┃ Experiment ┃ avg_prec ┃ roc_auc ┃ train.n_est┃ train.min_split
┡━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┩
│ workspace  │  0.60405 │  0.9608 │ 100        │ 64
│ master     │  0.60405 │  0.9608 │ 100        │ 64
│ 64d74b2    │  0.55259 │ 0.91536 │ 50         │ 2
└────────────┴──────────┴─────────┴────────────┴─────────────────┘
```

> > `dvc exp gc` only removes references to the experiments, not the cached
> > objects associated with it. To clean up the cache, use `dvc gc`.

Reviewer: Copy edit:
```suggestion
> `dvc exp gc` only removes references to the experiments, not the cached
> objects associated to them. To clean up the cache, use `dvc gc`.
```

running experiments. The `--set-param` (or `-S`) flag sets the values for
[parameters](/doc/command-reference/params) as a shortcut to editing
`params.yaml`.

Check that the `featurize.max_features` value has been updated in `params.yaml`:

```git
 featurize:
-  max_features: 1500
+  max_features: 3000
```

Any edits to <abbr>dependencies</abbr> (parameters or source code) will be
reflected in the experiment run.

</details>

`dvc exp diff` compares experiments:

```dvc
$ dvc exp diff
Path         Metric    Value    Change
scores.json  avg_prec  0.56191  0.009322
scores.json  roc_auc   0.93345  0.018087

Path         Param                   Value    Change
params.yaml  featurize.max_features  3000     1500
```

## Simultaneously running multiple experiments

So far, we have been tuning the `featurize` stage, but there are also parameters
for the `train` stage, which trains a
[random forest classifier](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier.html).

These are the `train` parameters in `params.yaml`:

```yaml
train:
  seed: 20170428
  n_est: 50
  min_split: 2
```

> Let's run experiments with different hyperparameter combinations. We can define
> all the combinations we want to try without executing anything using the
> `--queue` flag:

Reviewer: Follow up copy edit
```suggestion
Let's setup experiments with different hyperparameters. We can define all the
combinations we want to try without executing anything, by using the `--queue`
flag:
```

```dvc
$ dvc exp run --queue -S train.min_split=8
Queued experiment 'd3f6d1e' for future execution.
$ dvc exp run --queue -S train.min_split=64
Queued experiment 'f1810e0' for future execution.
$ dvc exp run --queue -S train.min_split=2 -S train.n_est=100
Queued experiment '7323ea2' for future execution.
$ dvc exp run --queue -S train.min_split=8 -S train.n_est=100
Queued experiment 'c605382' for future execution.
$ dvc exp run --queue -S train.min_split=64 -S train.n_est=100
Queued experiment '0cdee86' for future execution.
```

> Next, run all queued experiments simultaneously using `--run-all` (and in
> parallel with `--jobs`):

Reviewer: Again, not sure about "simultaneous". May be misleading? Up to you
```suggestion
Next, run all queued experiments using `--run-all` (and in parallel with
`--jobs`):
```

```dvc
$ dvc exp run --run-all --jobs 2
```

## Comparing many experiments

To compare all of these experiments, we need more than `diff`. `dvc exp show`
compares any number of experiments in one table:

```dvc

> $ dvc exp show --no-timestamp --include-params train.n_est,train.min_split

Reviewer: Oops it looks like this one also scrolls hor.
```suggestion
$ dvc exp show --no-timestamp
               --include-params train.n_est,train.min_split
```

```

<details>

### 💡 Expand to see what this command does.

`dvc exp apply` is similar to `dvc checkout` but it works with experiments that
have not been manually committed to the Git repo. DVC tracks everything in the
pipeline for each experiment (parameters, metrics, dependencies, and outputs)
and can later retrieve it as needed.

Check that `scores.json` reflects the metrics in the table above:

```json
{ "avg_prec": 0.6040544652105823, "roc_auc": 0.9608017142900953 }
```

</details>

Once an experiment has been applied to the workspace, it is no different from
reproducing the result without `dvc exp run`. Let's make it persistent in our
regular pipeline by committing it in our Git branch:

```dvc
$ git add dvc.lock params.yaml prc.json roc.json scores.json
$ git commit -a -m "Preserve best random forest experiment"
```

> `dvc push` only uploads persistent experiments that have been committed to
> Git. The other experiments will not be pushed to the remote. See
> `dvc exp push` and `dvc exp pull` for how to share other experiments.

## Cleaning up

After committing the best experiment to Git, let's take another look at the
experiments table:

```dvc

> $ dvc exp show --no-timestamp --include-params train.n_est,train.min_split

Reviewer: Same
```suggestion
$ dvc exp show --no-timestamp
               --include-params train.n_est,train.min_split

```
